A Transport Services System (#1288)
ietf-tapswg/api-drafts: draft-ietf-taps-arch.md

--- abstract

> This document defines the Transport Services system. This system exposes transport protocol features to applications for network communication. The Transport Services Application Programming Interface (API) is based on an asynchronous, event-driven interaction pattern. This API uses messages for representing data transfer to applications, and describes how implementations can use multiple IP addresses, multiple protocols, and multiple paths, and provide multiple application streams. This document provides the architecture and requirements. It defines common terminology and concepts to be used in definitions of a Transport Service API and a Transport Services Implementation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This document defines the Transport Services System. This system exposes transport protocol features to applications for network communication. The Transport Services Application Programming Interface (API) is based on an asynchronous, event-driven interaction pattern. This API uses messages for representing data transfer to applications, and describes how implementations can use multiple IP addresses, multiple protocols, and multiple paths, and provide multiple application streams. This document provides the architecture and requirements. It defines common terminology and concepts to be used in definitions of a Transport Service API and a Transport Services Implementation.
```

> describes an architecture for exposing transport protocol features to applications for network communication. This system exposes transport protocol features to applications for network communication. The Transport Services Application Programming Interface (API) is based on an asynchronous, event-driven interaction pattern. This API uses messages for representing data transfer to applications, and describes how a Transport Services Implementation can use multiple IP addresses, multiple protocols, and multiple paths, and provide multiple application streams. This document provides the architecture and requirements. It defines common terminology and concepts to be used in definitions of a Transport Service API and a Transport Services Implementation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This document describes an architecture for exposing transport protocol features to applications for network communication. This system exposes transport protocol features to applications for network communication. The Transport Services Application Programming Interface (API) is based on an asynchronous, event-driven interaction pattern. This API uses messages for representing data transfer to applications, and describes how a Transport Services Implementation can use multiple IP addresses, multiple protocols, and multiple paths, and provide multiple application streams. This document provides the architecture and requirements. It defines common terminology and concepts to be used in definitions of a Transport Service API and a Transport Services Implementation.
```

I believe the beginning was deleted in error?

Many application programming interfaces (APIs) to perform transport networking have been deployed, perhaps the most widely known and imitated being the BSD Socket {{POSIX}} interface (Socket API). The naming of objects and functions across these APIs is not consistent and varies depending on the protocol being used. For example, sending and receiving streams of data is conceptually the same for both an unencrypted Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) stream and operating on an encrypted Transport Layer Security (TLS) {{?RFC8446}} stream over TCP, but applications cannot use the same socket ```send()``` and ```recv()``` calls on top of both kinds of connections.
Similarly, terminology for the implementation of transport protocols varies based on the context of the protocols themselves: terms such as "flow", "stream", "message", and "connection" can take on many different meanings. This variety can lead to confusion when trying to understand the similarities and differences between protocols, and how applications can use them effectively.

> The goal of the Transport Services system is to provide a flexible

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The goal of the Transport Services System is to provide a flexible
```

and reusable system with a common interface for transport protocols. An application uses the Transport Services system through an abstract Connection (we use capitalization to distinguish these from the underlying connections of, e.g., TCP).
This provides
flexible connection establishment allowing an application to request or require a set of properties.

As applications adopt this interface, they will benefit from a wide set of transport features that can evolve over time,
and ensure that the system providing the interface can optimize its behavior based on the application requirements
and network conditions, without requiring changes to the applications. This flexibility enables faster deployment of new features and protocols.

> The Transport Services system can also support applications by offering racing mechanisms (attempting multiple IP addresses, protocols, or network paths in parallel), which otherwise need to be implemented in each application separately (see {{racing}}). Racing selects one or more candidates each with equivalent protocol stacks that are used to identify

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Transport Services System can also support applications by offering racing mechanisms (attempting multiple IP addresses, protocols, or network paths in parallel), which otherwise need to be implemented in each application separately (see {{racing}}). Racing selects one or more candidates each with equivalent protocol stacks that are used to identify
```

an optimal combination of transport protocol instance such as TCP, UDP, or another transport, together with configuration of parameters and
interfaces.
A Connection represents an object that, once established, can be used to send and receive messages.
A Connection can also be created from another Connection, by cloning, and then forms a part of a Connection Group whose Connections share properties.

> This document was developed in parallel with the specification of the Transport Services API {{?I-D.ietf-taps-interface}} and implementation guidelines {{?I-D.ietf-taps-impl}}. Although following the Transport Services architecture does not require that all APIs and implementations to be identical, a common minimal set of features represented in a consistent fashion will enable applications to be easily ported from one implementation of the Transport Services system to another.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This document was developed in parallel with the specification of the Transport Services API {{?I-D.ietf-taps-interface}} and implementation guidelines {{?I-D.ietf-taps-impl}}. Although following the Transport Services architecture does not require all APIs and implementations to be identical, a common minimal set of features represented in a consistent fashion will enable applications to be easily ported from one implementation of the Transport Services system to another.
```

## Background

> The architecture of the Transport Services system is based on the survey of services provided by IETF transport protocols and congestion control mechanisms {{?RFC8095}}, and the distilled minimal set of the features offered by transport protocols {{?RFC8923}}. These documents identified common features and patterns across all transport protocols developed thus far in the IETF.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The architecture of the Transport Services System is based on the survey of services provided by IETF transport protocols and congestion control mechanisms {{?RFC8095}}, and the distilled minimal set of the features offered by transport protocols {{?RFC8923}}. These documents identified common features and patterns across all transport protocols developed thus far in the IETF.
```

Since transport security is an increasingly relevant aspect of using transport protocols on the Internet, this also considers the impact of transport security protocols on the feature-set exposed by Transport Services {{?RFC8922}}.

> One of the key insights to come from identifying the minimal set of features provided by transport protocols {{?RFC8923}} was that features either require application interaction and guidance (referred to in that document as Functional or Optimizing Features), or else can be handled automatically by an implementation of the Transport Services system (referred to as Automatable Features). Among the identified Functional and Optimizing Features, some are common across all or nearly all transport protocols, while present features that, if specified, would only be useful with a subset of protocols, but would not harm the functionality of other protocols. For example, some protocols can deliver messages faster for applications that do not require messages to arrive in the order in which they were sent. However, this functionality needs to be explicitly allowed by the application, since reordering messages would be undesirable in many cases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of the key insights to come from identifying the minimal set of features provided by transport protocols {{?RFC8923}} was that features either require application interaction and guidance (referred to in that document as Functional or Optimizing Features), or else can be handled automatically by an implementation of the Transport Services System (referred to as Automatable Features). Among the identified Functional and Optimizing Features, some are common across all or nearly all transport protocols, while others present features that, if specified, would only be useful with a subset of protocols, but would not harm the functionality of other protocols. For example, some protocols can deliver messages faster for applications that do not require messages to arrive in the order in which they were sent. This functionality needs to be explicitly allowed by the application, since reordering messages would be undesirable in many cases.
```

## Overview

> This document describes the Transport Services system in three sections:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This document describes the Transport Services System in three sections:
```

> - {{model}} describes how the API model of Transport Services system differs from that of traditional socket-based APIs. Specifically, it offers asynchronous event-driven interaction, the use of messages for data transfer, and the flexibility to use different transport protocols and paths without requiring major changes to the application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- {{model}} describes how the API model of the Transport Services System differs from that of traditional socket-based APIs. Specifically, it offers asynchronous event-driven interaction, the use of messages for data transfer, and the flexibility to use different transport protocols and paths without requiring major changes to the application.
```

- {{requirements}} explains the fundamental requirements for a Transport Services system. These principles are intended to make sure that transport protocols can continue to be enhanced and evolve without requiring significant changes by application developers.

> - {{concepts}} presents the Transport Services system and defines the concepts that are used by both the API {{?I-D.ietf-taps-interface}} and described in the implementation guidelines {{?I-D.ietf-taps-impl}}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- {{concepts}} presents the Transport Services System and defines the concepts that are used by the API {{?I-D.ietf-taps-interface}} and described in the implementation guidelines {{?I-D.ietf-taps-impl}}.
```

The goal of the Transport Services System architecture is to provide a flexible
and reusable system with a common interface for transport protocols.
An application uses the Transport Services System through an abstract Connection (we use capitalization to distinguish these from the underlying connections of, e.g., TCP).
This provides
flexible connection establishment allowing an application to request or require a set of properties.

As applications adopt this interface, they will benefit from a wide set of transport features that can evolve over time,
and ensure that the system providing the interface can optimize its behavior based on the application requirements
and network conditions, without requiring changes to the applications. This flexibility enables faster deployment of new features and protocols.

> This acrhitecture can also support applications by offering racing mechanisms (attempting multiple IP addresses, protocols, or network paths in parallel), which otherwise need to be implemented in each application separately (see {{racing}}). Racing selects one or more candidates each with equivalent protocol stacks that are used to identify

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This architecture can also support applications by offering racing mechanisms (attempting multiple IP addresses, protocols, or network paths in parallel), which otherwise need to be implemented in each application separately (see {{racing}}). Racing selects one or more candidates each with equivalent protocol stacks that are used to identify
```

## Overview

This document describes the Transport Services System in three sections:

- {{model}} describes how the API model of architecture differs from that of traditional socket-based APIs. Specifically, it offers asynchronous event-driven interaction, the use of messages for data transfer, and the flexibility to use different transport protocols and paths without requiring major changes to the application.

- {{requirements}} explains the fundamental requirements for a Transport Services System. These principles are intended to make sure that transport protocols can continue to be enhanced and evolve without requiring significant changes by application developers.

> - {{concepts}} presents the Transport Services Implementation and defines the concepts that are used by the API {{?I-D.ietf-taps-interface}} and described in the implementation guidelines {{?I-D.ietf-taps-impl}}. This introdcues the Preconnection, which allows applications to configure Connection Properties.

Reviewer 3: introdcues -> introduces

> - {{concepts}} presents the Transport Services Implementation and defines the concepts that are used by the API {{?I-D.ietf-taps-interface}} and described in the implementation guidelines {{?I-D.ietf-taps-impl}}. This introdcues the Preconnection, which allows applications to configure Connection Properties.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- {{concepts}} presents the Transport Services Implementation and defines the concepts that are used by the API {{?I-D.ietf-taps-interface}} and described in the implementation guidelines {{?I-D.ietf-taps-impl}}. This introduces the Preconnection, which allows applications to configure Connection Properties.
```

One of the key insights to come from identifying the minimal set of features provided by transport protocols {{?RFC8923}} was that features either require application interaction and guidance (referred to in that document as Functional or Optimizing Features), or else can be handled automatically by an implementation of the Transport Services System (referred to as Automatable Features). Among the identified Functional and Optimizing Features, some are common across all or nearly all transport protocols, while others present features that, if specified, would only be useful with a subset of protocols, but would not harm the functionality of other protocols. For example, some protocols can deliver messages faster for applications that do not require messages to arrive in the order in which they were sent. This functionality needs to be explicitly allowed by the application, since reordering messages would be undesirable in many cases.

## Overview

This document describes the Transport Services System in three sections:

> - {{model}} describes how the API model of architecture differs from that of traditional socket-based APIs. Specifically, it offers asynchronous event-driven interaction, the use of messages for data transfer, and the flexibility to use different transport protocols and paths without requiring major changes to the application.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- {{model}} describes how the Transport Services API model differs from that of traditional socket-based APIs. Specifically, it offers asynchronous event-driven interaction, the use of messages for data transfer, and the flexibility to use different transport protocols and paths without requiring major changes to the application.
```

- Transport Feature: A specific end-to-end feature that the transport layer provides to an application.
- Transport Property: A property that expresses requirements, prohibitions and preferences {{?RFC8095}}.
- Transport Service: A set of transport features, without an association to any given framing protocol, that provides a complete service to an application.

> - Transport Service Implementation: This consists of all objects and protocol instances used internally to a system or library to implement the functionality needed to provide a transport service across a network, as required by the abstract interface.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Transport Services Implementation: This consists of all objects and protocol instances used internally to a system or library to implement the functionality needed to provide a transport service across a network, as required by the abstract interface.
```

~~~~~~~~~~
{: #fig-sockets title="Socket API Model"}

> The architecture of the Transport Services evolves this general model of interaction, to both modernize the API surface presented to applications by the transport layer and to enrich the capabilities of the implementation below the API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The architecture of the Transport Services System evolves this general model of interaction, to both modernize the API surface presented to applications by the transport layer and to enrich the capabilities of the implementation below the API.
```

The Transport Services API {{?I-D.ietf-taps-interface}} defines the interface for an application to create Connections and transfer data. It combines interfaces for multiple interaction patterns into a unified whole (see figure 2). By combining name resolution with connection establishment and data transfer in a single API, it allows for more flexible implementations to provide path and transport protocol agility on the application's behalf.

> The Transport Services Implementation {{?I-D.ietf-taps-impl}} is the component of the Transport Services system that implements the transport layer protocols and other functions needed to send and receive data. It is responsible for mapping the API to a specific available transport Protocol Stack and managing the available network interfaces and paths.

Reviewer: I like that this is here, and I don't know how to say it shorter - but in some form, the "Transport Services Implementation" should also be added to the glossary.

> The Transport Services Implementation {{?I-D.ietf-taps-impl}} is the component of the Transport Services system that implements the transport layer protocols and other functions needed to send and receive data. It is responsible for mapping the API to a specific available transport Protocol Stack and managing the available network interfaces and paths.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Transport Services Implementation {{?I-D.ietf-taps-impl}} is the component of the Transport Services System that implements the transport layer protocols and other functions needed to send and receive data. It is responsible for mapping the API to a specific available transport Protocol Stack and managing the available network interfaces and paths.
```

> There are key differences between the architecture of the Transport Services system and the architecture of the Socket API: the API of the Transport Services system is asynchronous and event-driven; it uses messages for representing data transfer to applications; and it describes how a Transport Serrvices Implementation can resolve Endpoint identifiers to use multiple IP addresses, multiple protocols, multiple paths, and provide multiple application streams.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are key differences between the architecture of the Transport Services System and the architecture of the Socket API: the API of the Transport Services System is asynchronous and event-driven; it uses messages for representing data transfer to applications; and it describes how a Transport Services Implementation can resolve Endpoint identifiers to use multiple IP addresses, multiple protocols, multiple paths, and provide multiple application streams.
```

## Event-Driven API

Originally, the Socket API presented a blocking interface for establishing connections and transferring data. However, most modern applications interact with the network asynchronously. Emulation of an asynchronous interface using the Socket API can use a try-and-fail model: If the application wants to read, but data has not yet been received from the peer, the call to read will fail. The application then waits and can try again later.

In contrast to the Socket API, all interactions using the Transport Services API are expected to be asynchronous. The API is defined around an event-driven model (see {{events}}), which models this asynchronous interaction. Other forms of asynchronous communication could also be available to applications, depending on the platform implementing the interface.

> For example, when using the Transport Services API, an application first issues a call to receive new data from the connection and a Preconnection allows the application to configure Connection Properties. When delivered data becomes available, this data is delivered to the application using asynchronous events that contain the data. Error handling is also asynchronous; a failure to send data results in an asynchronous error event.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, when using the Transport Services API, an application first issues a call to receive new data from the Connection and a Preconnection allows the application to configure Connection Properties. When delivered data becomes available, this data is delivered to the application using asynchronous events that contain the data. Error handling is also asynchronous; a failure to send data results in an asynchronous error event.
```

## Event-Driven API

Originally, the Socket API presented a blocking interface for establishing connections and transferring data. However, most modern applications interact with the network asynchronously. Emulation of an asynchronous interface using the Socket API can use a try-and-fail model: If the application wants to read, but data has not yet been received from the peer, the call to read will fail. The application then waits and can try again later.

In contrast to the Socket API, all interactions using the Transport Services API are expected to be asynchronous. The API is defined around an event-driven model (see {{events}}), which models this asynchronous interaction. Other forms of asynchronous communication could also be available to applications, depending on the platform implementing the interface.

> For example, when using the Transport Services API, a receiving application first creates a Preconnection. This allows the application to configure Connection Properties. It then issues a call to receive new data from the Connection. When delivered data becomes available, this data is delivered to the application using asynchronous events that contain the data. Error handling is also asynchronous, resulting in asynchronous error events.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
For example, when an application that uses the Transport Services API wants to receive data, it issues an asynchronous call to receive new data from the Connection. When delivered data becomes available, this data is delivered to the application using asynchronous events that contain the data. Error handling is also asynchronous, resulting in asynchronous error events.
```

Information used in connection establishment (e.g. cryptographic resumption tokens, information about usability of certain protocols on the path, results of racing in previous connections) are cached in the Transport Services Implementation. Applications have control over whether this information is used for a specific establishment, in order to allow tradeoffs between efficiency and linkability.

Flexibility after connection establishment is also important. Transport protocols that can migrate between multiple network-layer interfaces need to be able to process and react to interface changes. Protocols that support multiple application-layer streams need to support initiating and receiving new streams using existing connections.

## Coexistence

> Note that while the Transport Service system is designed as an enhanced replacement for the Socket API, it need not replace it entirely on a system or platform; indeed, coexistence has been recommended for incremental deployability {{?RFC8170}}. The architecture is therefore designed such that it can run alongside (or, indeed, on top of) an existing Socket API implementation; only applications built to the Transport Services API are managed by the system's Transport Services Implementation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that while the Transport Service System is designed as an enhanced replacement for the Socket API, it need not replace it entirely on a system or platform; indeed, coexistence has been recommended for incremental deployability {{?RFC8170}}. The architecture is therefore designed such that it can run alongside (or, indeed, on top of) an existing Socket API implementation; only applications built to the Transport Services API are managed by the system's Transport Services Implementation.
```

# API and Implementation Requirements {#requirements}

> A goal of the Transport Services system is to redefine the interface between applications and transports in a way that allows the transport layer to evolve and improve without fundamentally changing the contract with the application. This requires a careful consideration of how to expose the capabilities of protocols. This architecture also encompasses system policies that can influence and inform how transport protocols use a network path or interface.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A goal of the Transport Services System is to redefine the interface between applications and transports in a way that allows the transport layer to evolve and improve without fundamentally changing the contract with the application. This requires a careful consideration of how to expose the capabilities of protocols. This architecture also encompasses system policies that can influence and inform how transport protocols use a network path or interface.
```

## Provide Common APIs for Common Features

Any functionality that is common across multiple transport protocols SHOULD be made accessible through a unified set of calls using the Transport Services API. As a baseline, any Transport Services API SHOULD allow access to the minimal set of features offered by transport protocols {{?RFC8923}}. If that minimal set is updated or expanded in the future, the Transport Services API ought to be extended to match.

An application can specify constraints and preferences for the protocols, features, and network interfaces it will use via Properties. Properties are used by an application to declare its preferences for how the transport service should operate at each stage in the lifetime of a connection. Transport Properties are subdivided into Selection Properties, which specify which paths and Protocol Stacks can be used and are preferred by the application; Connection Properties, which inform decisions made during connection establishment and fine-tune the established connection; and Message Properties, set on individual Messages.

> It is RECOMMENDED that the Transport Services API offers properties that are common to multiple transport protocols. This enables a Transport Services system to appropriately select between protocols that offer equivalent features. Similarly, it is RECOMMENDED that the Properties offered by the Transport Services  API are applicable to a variety of network layer interfaces and paths, which permits racing of different network paths without affecting the applications using the API. Each is expected to have a default value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is RECOMMENDED that the Transport Services API offers properties that are common to multiple transport protocols. This enables a Transport Services System to appropriately select between protocols that offer equivalent features. Similarly, it is RECOMMENDED that the Properties offered by the Transport Services  API are applicable to a variety of network layer interfaces and paths, which permits racing of different network paths without affecting the applications using the API. Each is expected to have a default value.
```

It is RECOMMENDED that the default values for Properties are selected to ensure correctness for the widest set of applications, while providing the widest set of options for selection. For example, since both applications that require reliability and those that do not require reliability can function correctly when a protocol provides reliability, reliability ought to be enabled by default. As another example, the default value for a Property regarding the selection of network interfaces ought to permit as many interfaces as possible.

> Applications using the Transport Services API need to be designed to be robust to the automated selection provided by the Transport Services system. This automated selection is constrained by the properties and preferences expressed by the application and requires applications to explicitly set properties that define any necessary constraints on protocol, path, and interface selection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Applications using the Transport Services API need to be designed to be robust to the automated selection provided by the Transport Services System. This automated selection is constrained by the properties and preferences expressed by the application and requires applications to explicitly set properties that define any necessary constraints on protocol, path, and interface selection.
```

Flexibility after connection establishment is also important. Transport protocols that can migrate between multiple network-layer interfaces need to be able to process and react to interface changes. Protocols that support multiple application-layer streams need to support initiating and receiving new streams using existing connections.

## Coexistence

While the architecture of the Transport Services System is designed as an enhanced replacement for the Socket API, it need not replace it entirely on a system or platform; indeed, coexistence has been recommended for incremental deployability {{?RFC8170}}. The architecture is therefore designed such that it can run alongside (or, indeed, on top of) an existing Socket API implementation; only applications built to the Transport Services API are managed by the system's Transport Services Implementation.

# API and Implementation Requirements {#requirements}

> One goal of the archietcture is to redefine the interface between applications and transports in a way that allows the transport layer to evolve and improve without fundamentally changing the contract with the application. This requires a careful consideration of how to expose the capabilities of protocols. The architecture also encompasses system policies that can influence and inform how transport protocols use a network path or interface.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
One goal of the architecture is to redefine the interface between applications and transports in a way that allows the transport layer to evolve and improve without fundamentally changing the contract with the application. This requires a careful consideration of how to expose the capabilities of protocols. The architecture also encompasses system policies that can influence and inform how transport protocols use a network path or interface.
```

Flexibility after connection establishment is also important. Transport protocols that can migrate between multiple network-layer interfaces need to be able to process and react to interface changes. Protocols that support multiple application-layer streams need to support initiating and receiving new streams using existing connections.

## Coexistence

While the architecture of the Transport Services System is designed as an enhanced replacement for the Socket API, it need not replace it entirely on a system or platform; indeed, coexistence has been recommended for incremental deployability {{?RFC8170}}. The architecture is therefore designed such that it can run alongside (or, indeed, on top of) an existing Socket API implementation; only applications built to the Transport Services API are managed by the system's Transport Services Implementation.

# API and Implementation Requirements {#requirements}

> One goal of the archietcture is to redefine the interface between applications and transports in a way that allows the transport layer to evolve and improve without fundamentally changing the contract with the application. This requires a careful consideration of how to expose the capabilities of protocols. The architecture also encompasses system policies that can influence and inform how transport protocols use a network path or interface.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
One goal of the architecture is to redefine the interface between applications and transports in a way that allows the transport layer to evolve and improve without fundamentally changing the contract with the application. This requires a careful consideration of how to expose the capabilities of protocols. The architecture also encompasses system policies that can influence and inform how transport protocols use a network path or interface.
```

A Transport Services Implementation can race different security
protocols, e.g., if the application explicitly specifies that it considers them equivalent.
A Transport Services implementation SHOULD only race Protocol Stacks where the transport security protocols within the stacks are identical.
To ensure that security protocols are not incorrectly swapped, a Transport Services Implementation MUST only select Protocol Stacks that meet application requirements ({{?RFC8922}}).
A Transport Services Implementation MUST NOT automatically fall back from secure protocols to insecure protocols, or to weaker versions of secure protocols.
A Transport Services Implementation MAY allow applications to explicitly specify which versions of a protocol ought to be permitted, e.g., to allow a minimum version of TLS 1.2 in case TLS 1.3 is not available.

A Transport Services Implementation MAY specify security properties relating to how the system operates (e.g., requirements, prohibitions, and preferences for the use of DNS Security Extensions (DNSSEC) or DNS over HTTPS (DoH)).

## Maintain Interoperability

> It is important to note that neither the Transport Services API {{?I-D.ietf-taps-interface}} nor the guidelines for the Transport Service implementation {{?I-D.ietf-taps-impl}} define new protocols or protocol capabilities that affect what is communicated across the network. A Transport Services system MUST NOT require that a peer on the other side of a connection uses the same API or implementation. A Transport Services Implementation acting as a connection initiator is able to communicate with any existing endpoint that implements the transport protocol(s) and all the required properties selected. Similarly, a Transport Services Implementation acting as a Listener can receive connections for any protocol that is supported from an existing initiator that implements the protocol, independent of whether the initiator uses the Transport Services system or not.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is important to note that neither the Transport Services API {{?I-D.ietf-taps-interface}} nor the guidelines for the Transport Service implementation {{?I-D.ietf-taps-impl}} define new protocols or protocol capabilities that affect what is communicated across the network. A Transport Services system MUST NOT require that a peer on the other side of a connection uses the same API or implementation. A Transport Services Implementation acting as a connection initiator is able to communicate with any existing endpoint that implements the transport protocol(s) and all the required properties selected. Similarly, a Transport Services Implementation acting as a Listener can receive connections for any protocol that is supported from an existing initiator that implements the protocol, independent of whether the initiator uses the Transport Services System or not.
```

A Transport Services system makes decisions that select protocols and interfaces. In normal use, a given version of a Transport Services system SHOULD result in consistent protocol and interface selection decisions for the same network conditions given the same set of Properties. This is intended to provide predictable outcomes to the application using the API.

# Transport Services Architecture and Concepts {#concepts}

This section of the document describes the architecture non-normatively. The concepts defined in this document are intended primarily for use in the documents and specifications that describe the Transport Services system. This includes the architecture, the Transport Services API and the associated Transport Services Implementation. While the specific terminology can be used in some implementations, it is expected that there will remain a variety of terms used by running code.

The architecture divides the concepts for Transport Services system into two categories:

1. API concepts, which are intended to be exposed to applications; and
2. System-implementation concepts, which are intended to be internally used by a Transport Services Implementation.

> The following diagram summarizes the top-level concepts in a Transport Servcies system and how they relate to one another.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following diagram summarizes the top-level concepts in a Transport Services System and how they relate to one another.
```

# Transport Services Architecture and Concepts {#concepts}

> This section of the document describes the architecture non-normatively and explain the operation of a Transport Services Implementation. The concepts defined in this document are intended primarily for use in the documents and specifications that describe the Transport Services System. This includes the architecture, the Transport Services API and the associated Transport Services Implementation. While the specific terminology can be used in some implementations, it is expected that there will remain a variety of terms used by running code.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This section of the document describes the architecture non-normatively and explains the operation of a Transport Services Implementation. The concepts defined in this document are intended primarily for use in the documents and specifications that describe the Transport Services System. This includes the architecture, the Transport Services API and the associated Transport Services Implementation. While the specific terminology can be used in some implementations, it is expected that there will remain a variety of terms used by running code.
```

For multiplexing transport protocols, only Connections within the same Connection Group are allowed to be multiplexed together. Passive Connections can also be added to a Connection Group, e.g., when a Listener receives a new Connection that is just a new stream of an already active multi-streaming protocol
instance.

While Connection Groups are managed by the Transport Services Implementation, an application can define different Connection Contexts for different Connection Groups to explicitly control caching boundaries, as discussed in {{conn-context}}.

## Transport Services Implementation

This section defines the key concepts for the Transport Services Implementation within the Transport Services System.

> The Transport Services System consists of the Transport Service implementation and the Transport Services API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Transport Services System consists of the Transport Services Implementation and the Transport Services API.
```

For multiplexing transport protocols, only Connections within the same Connection Group are allowed to be multiplexed together. Passive Connections can also be added to a Connection Group, e.g., when a Listener receives a new Connection that is just a new stream of an already active multi-streaming protocol
instance.

While Connection Groups are managed by the Transport Services Implementation, an application can define different Connection Contexts for different Connection Groups to explicitly control caching boundaries, as discussed in {{conn-context}}.

## Transport Services Implementation

> This section defines the key archirtectural concepts for the Transport Services Implementation within the Transport Services System.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This section defines the key architectural concepts for the Transport Services Implementation within the Transport Services System.
```

## Transport Services Implementation

> This section defines the key concepts for the Transport Services Implementation within the Transport Services system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This section defines the key concepts for the Transport Services Implementation within the Transport Services System.
```

# Security and Privacy Considerations

> The Transport Services system does not recommend use of specific security

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Transport Services System does not recommend use of specific security
```

protocols or algorithms. Its goal is to offer ease of use for existing protocols
by providing a generic security-related interface. Each provided interface
translates to an existing protocol-specific interface provided by supported
security protocols. For example, trust verification callbacks are common parts
of TLS APIs; a Transport Services API exposes similar functionality
{{?RFC8922}}.

> As described above in {{equivalence}}, if an implementation of the Transport Services system races

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As described above in {{equivalence}}, if an implementation of the Transport Services System races
```
